Tutorial on how to find system steady states usings NonlinearSolve.jl (#720)
SciML/Catalyst.jl: docs/src/catalyst_applications/nonlinear_solve.md

# [Finding Steady States using NonlinearSolve.jl](@id nonlinear_solve)

> We have previously described how `ReactionSystem` steady states can be found through [homotopy continuation](@ref homotopy_continuation). Catalyst also supports the creation of `NonlinearProblems` corresponding to `ODEProblems` with all left-hand side derivatives set to 0. These can be solved using the variety of nonlinear equation-solving algorithms implemented by [NonlinearSolve.jl](https://github.com/SciML/NonlinearSolve.jl), with the solutions corresponding to system steady states. Generally, this approach is preferred when one only wishes to find *a single solution* (with homotopy continuation being preferred when one wishes to find *all solutions*). 

Reviewer: Might be worth mentioning Nonlinearsolve is also the only approach when the system does not involve rational(?) functions in the species for rate laws (or is it just mass action and the Catalyst specific rate functions we have like mm that work with homotopy continuation?).

Author: Very good point.

## Basic example
Let us consider a simple dimerisation network, where a protein ($P$) can exist in a monomer and a dimer form. The protein is produced at a constant rate from its mRNA, which is also produced at a constant rate.
```@example nonlinear_solve1
using Catalyst
dimer_production = @reaction_network begin
    pₘ, 0 --> mRNA
    pₚ, mRNA --> mRNA + P
    (k₁, k₂), 2P <--> P₂
    d, (mRNA, P, P₂) --> 0
end
```
This system corresponds to the following ODE:
```math
\begin{aligned}
\frac{dmRNA}{dt} &= pₘ - d \cdot mRNA \\
\frac{dP}{dt} &= pₚ \cdot mRNA - k₁ \cdot P + 2k₂ \cdot P₂ - d \cdot P \\
\frac{dP₂}{dt} &= k₁ \cdot P + 2k₂ \cdot P₂ \\
\end{aligned}
```
To find its steady states we need to solve:
```math
\begin{aligned}
0 &= pₘ - d \cdot mRNA \\
0 &= pₚ \cdot mRNA - k₁ \cdot P + 2k₂ \cdot P₂ - d \cdot P \\
0 &= k₁ \cdot P + 2k₂ \cdot P₂ \\
\end{aligned}

> ```

Reviewer: Why not use Latexify to generate these automatically?

Author: Latexify has a tendency to jumble up equations a bit, making things come in weird order. Maybe it is better now, will check.

To solve this problem, we must first designate our parameter values, and also make an initial guess of the solution. Generally, for problems with a single solution (like this one), most arbitrary guesses will work fine (the exception typically being [systems with conservation laws](@ref nonlinear_solve_conservation_laws)). Using these, we can create the `NonlinearProblem` that we wish to solve.
```@example nonlinear_solve1
p = [:pₘ => 0.5, :pₚ => 2.0, :k₁ => 5.0, :k₂ => 1.0, :d => 1.0]
u_guess = [:mRNA => 1.0, :P => 1.0, :P₂ => 1.0]
nl_prob = NonlinearProblem(dimer_production, u_guess, p)
```
Finally, we can solve it using the `solve` command, returning the steady state solution:
```@example nonlinear_solve1
using NonlinearSolve
solve(nl_prob)
```

NonlinearSolve provides [a wide range of potential solvers](https://docs.sciml.ai/NonlinearSolve/stable/solvers/NonlinearSystemSolvers/). If we wish to designate one, it can be supplied as a second argument to `solve`. Here, we use the Newton Trust Region method:
```@example nonlinear_solve1

> solve(nl_prob, TrustRegion())

Reviewer: Maybe show the solutions the two methods get agree via `isapprox`?

Author: Makes sense, will add.

nothing # hide
```

## [Finding steady states through ODE simulations](@id nonlinear_solve_ode_simulation_based)
The `NonlinearProblem`s generated by Catalyst corresponds to ODEs. A common method of solving these is to simulate the ODE from an initial condition until a steady state is reached. NonlinearSolve supports this through the `DynamicSS` method. To use it, an appropriate ODE solver (and any options you wish it to use) must also be supplied (with [a large number being available](https://docs.sciml.ai/DiffEqDocs/stable/solvers/ode_solve/)). Here, we will use the `Tsit5` ODE solver to find the steady states of our dimerisation system.
```@example nonlinear_solve1
using OrdinaryDiffEq, SteadyStateDiffEq
solve(nprob, DynamicSS(Tsit5()))
```
Here, we had to import [OrdinaryDiffEq.jl](https://github.com/SciML/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl) (to use `Tsit5`) and [SteadyStateDiffEq.jl](https://github.com/SciML/SteadyStateDiffEq.jl) (to use `DynamicSS`).

> Like previously, the found steady state is unaffected by the initial `u` guess. However, when [finding the steady states of systems with conservation laws](@ref nonlinear_solve_conservation_laws) it is important to select a `u` guess corresponding to the initial condition of the ODE simulation which steady state is sought.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like previously, the found steady state is unaffected by the initial `u` guess. However, when [finding the steady states of systems with conservation laws](@ref nonlinear_solve_conservation_laws) it is important to select a `u` guess that corresponds to the initial condition for the ODE model for which a steady state is sought.
```

## [Systems with conservation laws](@id nonlinear_solve_conservation_laws)
As described in the section on homotopy continuation, when finding the steady states of systems with conservation laws, [additional considerations have to be taken](homotopy_continuation_conservation_laws). E.g. consider the following two-state system:
```@example nonlinear_solve2
using Catalyst, NonlinearSolve # hide
two_state_model = @reaction_network begin
    (k1,k2), X1 <--> X2
end
```

> It has an infinite number of steady states. To make steady state finding possible, information of the system's conserved quantities (here $C=X1+X2$) must be provided. Since these can be computed from system initial conditions (`u0`, i.e. those provided when performing ODE simulations), designating an `u0` is often the best way. This can either be done by performing [ODE simulation-based steady state finding](@ref), using the initial condition as the initial `u` guess. Alternatively, any conservation quantities can be eliminated when the `NonlinearProblem` is created. This feature is supported by Catalyst's [conservation law finding and elimination feature](@ref network_analysis_deficiency).

Reviewer: ```
This can either be done by performing [ODE simulation-based steady state finding](@ref), using the initial condition as the initial `u` guess. Alternatively, any conservation quantities can be eliminated when the `NonlinearProblem` is created.
```
is a bit awkwardly/confusingly worded. I would reword.

Author: 👍

To eliminate conservation laws we simply provide the `remove_conserved = true` argument to `NonlinearProblem`:
```@example nonlinear_solve2
p = [:k1 => 2.0, :k2 => 3.0]
u_guess = [:X1 => 3.0, :X2 => 1.0]
nl_prob = NonlinearProblem(two_state_model, u_guess, p; remove_conserved = true)
nothing # hide
```

> here it is important that the quantities used in `u_guess` correspond to the conserved quantities we wish to use. E.g. here the conserved quantity $X1 + X2= 3.0 + 1.0 = 4$ holds in the input, and will hence do in the output as well. We can now find the steady states using `solve` like before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
here it is important that the quantities used in `u_guess` correspond to the conserved quantities we wish to use. E.g. here the conserved quantity $X1 + X2= 3.0 + 1.0 = 4$ holds for the initial condition, and will hence also hold in the calculated steady-state as well. We can now find the steady states using `solve` like before:
```

```@example nonlinear_solve2
sol = solve(nl_prob)
```

> We note that the output only provides a single value. The reason is that the actual system solved only contains a single equation (the other being eliminated with the conserved quantity). To find the values of $X1$ and $X2$ we can [inference the solution object using these as input](@ref simulation_structure_interfacing_solutions):

Reviewer: ```
inference the solution object using these as input
```
is confusing to me. Can you reword?

Author: yes, will do.
